NE-1948: ingress: Add dynamic-config-manager enhancement (#1687)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/dynamic-config-manager.md

---
title: dynamic-config-manager
authors:
  - "@Miciah"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2024-09-25
last-updated: 2024-09-25
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RFE-1439
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-525
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-879
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-422
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-870
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

> # OpenShift Router Dynamic Config Manager

Author: Fair enough.  We use "dynamic config manager" in the source code and colloquially, but https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/install_config/router/default_haproxy_router.html#using-the-dynamic-configuration-manager has "Dynamic Configuration Manager".

## Summary

OpenShift 4.18 enables Dynamic Config Manager with 1 pre-allocated server per
backend, without blueprint routes, and without any configuration options.  The
goal is to deliver a minimum viable product on which to iterate.  This MVP
provides marginal value by avoiding reloading HAProxy for a single scale-out
event or subsequent scale-in event for a route, at minimal development and
operational cost.  More importantly, the MVP gives us CI signal, enables us to
work out defects in DCM, and gives us a starting point from which to enhance DCM

> in subsequent OpenShift releases.  In the future, we intend to extend DCM with

Author: To be clear, this isn't a special _version_ of DCM; it's a specific _configuration_ of DCM.  However, I can add mention that we are shipping this as Tech Preview in 4.18.

OpenShift router has long suffered from issues related to long-lived connections
and frequent reloads.  The model for updating the router's configuration in
response to route and endpoints updates is to write out a new `haproxy.config`
file and reload HAProxy, which forks a new process and keeps the old process
around until it has closed all the connections that it had open at the time of
the fork.  This fork-and-reload approach has negative implications for
performance, metrics, and balancing.  Foremost, when HAProxy is handling
long-lived connections during repeated configuration updates, old processes
accumulate and use exorbitant amounts of memory.  Additionally, the
fork-and-reload approach reduces accuracy of metrics as the metrics are only
updated for the new process.  For the same reason, the fork-and-reload approach
reduces the accuracy of HAProxy's load balancing algorithms.

The solution to these issues is to configure HAProxy dynamically.  This is
exactly what the Dynamic Config Manager (DCM) does: DCM configures a running
HAProxy process through a Unix domain socket.  This means that no forking is
necessary to update configuration and effectuate the changes.

> However, DCM requires some work before it can be enabled.  DCM was first

Author: We had to fix several defects in DCM itself before we were comfortable shipping it even in this MVP configuration, and even as a Tech Preview feature.  I don't know whether it is considered "viable" at this point, or whether we would consider it "viable" if further testing reveals no new defects.  How about this?
```suggestion
However, DCM requires development work to fix several known issues as well as extensive testing in order to ensure that enabling it does not introduce regressions.  DCM was first
```

### User Stories

_As a cluster administrator, I want OpenShift router not to use excessive memory
when the HAProxy configuration changes and the HAProxy process has many
long-lived connections._

Without the Dynamic Config Manager, OpenShift router suffers from a well known
performance issue when the following two conditions are met:

* A router pod reloads its configuration frequently because of route or endpoints updates.
* The same router pod handles long-lived connections.

Reloading the HAProxy configuration involves forking a new process with the new
configuration.  The old process remains open until all connections that were
open at the time of the configuration reload have terminated.  In the case of
long-lived connections, this means that the old process can remain for a long
period of time.  If the router has frequent configuration reloads due to changes
to route configuration, this can cause these old processes to accumulate and use
a large amount of memory, on the order of hundreds of megabytes or multiple
gigabytes per process, ultimately causing out-of-memory errors on the node host.

DCM addresses this issue by reducing the need to reload the configuration.

> Instead, DCM configures HAProxy using its Unix domain control socket, which does

Author: True, "control socket" is a term we use colloquially within the team, and it doesn't appear in the HAProxy documentation, which uses the term "stats socket".  However, "stats socket" is a bit of a misnomer, I don't see "Runtime API" in <https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/management.html>, and "Unix domain control socket" _is_ descriptive of what the socket is, the capabilities of the socket, and our usage of it.  Would it be all right by you if I continued using the term "control socket" but defined it up front in the EP?

> Instead, DCM configures HAProxy using its Unix domain control socket, which does

Reviewer: The Runtime API can be accessed via a UNIX socket or via IP:port. Ref: [HAProxy Runtime API installation guide](https://www.haproxy.com/documentation/haproxy-runtime-api/installation/).

> Instead, DCM configures HAProxy using its Unix domain control socket, which does

Author: It seems that "Runtime API" really means commands on the stats socket.  However, "Runtime API" seems to be part of the nomenclature from the commercial HAProxy product documentation whereas the project does not use this nomenclature.  Personally, I find the phrase "Runtime API" confusing and unnecessary.  

Would you be all right with using the phrase "Unix Socket commands" from the HAProxy documentation, with a reference to the same?
```suggestion
Instead, DCM configures HAProxy using [Unix Socket commands](https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/management.html#9.3), which does
```

and deleted, and also scale-out and scale-in of backends as routes are created
and deleted, as well as changes to certificates and other route options, all
without requiring a fork and reload.

_As a cluster administrator, I want metrics to be accurate when routes and
endpoints are updated._

OpenShift router does take care to preserve metrics values across reloads in
order to avoid resetting counters to zero when the new process starts.  However,
while values from the old process are preserved, the old process cannot update
metrics after the reload.  For example, the metrics reflect the total number of
bytes that the old process had transferred at the point of the configuration
reload, but if the old process continues transferring data after the new process
starts, the metrics do not reflect the count of any additional bytes
transferred.

Dynamic Config Manager addresses this issue again by reducing the need to reload
the configuration and fork a new process.  Again, the degree to which DCM
mitigates this issue is dependent on the nature of the configuration changes.

_As a project administrator, I want HAProxy to balance traffic evenly over old

> and new pods when I scale my application up._

Author: Yeah, I would say it's still true.  I prefer "evenly" because it is more evocative of the problem we are trying to avoid: an excessive share of the traffic going to the first server in the backend.  However, I can write "correctly" if that is clearer.  Adding "or down" does make sense.  (I should probably make it "in or out" since we are talking about adding or removing pod replicas, not increasing or decreasing the resources available to each pod.)

"random", and "leastconn" balancing algorithms.  However, following a reload,
the new HAProxy process does not have data on how many connections the old
processes have to each backend server.  This lack of data can cause uneven
traffic load over backend servers from the aggregate set of haproxy processes
because the new process balances over the set of backend services without any
coordination with the old processes.

Dynamic Config Manager addresses this issue again by eliminating the need to
reload the configuration for endpoints changes.  Because adding and removing
servers is possible to do through HAProxy's control socket, DCM is able to
eliminate the problem of uneven load resulting from adding or removing
endpoints.

Note that DCM is not able to prevent imbalance in the event of an endpoints
update combined with an update that requires a configuration reload.  DCM also
cannot prevent imbalance in the case of many router pod replicas with relatively
few connections.  For example, multiple router pod replicas each receiving a
single request for the same route can all choose the same backend server; router
pod replicas do not coordinate with each other.

### Goals

> - DCM is enabled by default on OpenShift 4.18 clusters.

Author: It is Tech Preview.  I need to update the EP accordingly.

  - Initially, changing certificates or annotations will still require a reload.
  - Initially, multiple successive scale-out events will still require a reload.
- DCM cannot handle *router* configuration changes (that is, *global* options).
  - DCM does not handle the `timeout`, `maxconn`, `nbthread`, or `log` options.
  - Updates to the router configuration still generally require a pod restart.
- DCM does not coordinate among router pods.
  - Traffic can still be unbalanced if multiple router pods use the same server.

## Proposal

OpenShift router's Dynamic Config Manager (DCM) was implemented in OpenShift
Enterprise 3.11 with HAProxy 1.8.  Although DCM was not previously enabled in
OpenShift Container Platform 4, the implementation was never removed from the
source code.  However, it has not been actively developed by engineering or
tested by QA or in CI in OpenShift 4.  Therefore, this enhancement proposes the
following steps:

1. Manually verify that the router functions and passes E2E tests with DCM enabled.
2. Add a tech-preview featuregate in openshift/api for DCM.
3. Update cluster-ingress-operator to enable DCM if the featuregate is enabled.

> 4. Re-enable old E2E tests in openshift/origin for DCM.

Reviewer: Can this be done if DCM will be in techpreview featureset?

Author: Yes.  The openshift/origin tests create router pods directly, so the tests can enable DCM irrespective of the featuregate: https://github.com/openshift/origin/blob/203d2b124037a543d8719ba7e2a369f52f01686d/test/extended/router/config_manager.go#L328-L489

5. Possibly remove outdated logic from DCM.
6. Run E2E, payload tests, and performance tests with DCM enabled.
7. Allow DCM to soak as tech preview for at least 1 OCP release.
8. Possibly add new logic to DCM to exploit new HAProxy 2.y features.

> 9. Remove the featuregate and mark DCM as GA.

Author: (Hm, I'm confused that I wrote this.  At one time, we were planning to add DCM as TechPreviewNoUpgrade at the start of the release cycle and then graduate DCM to GA later in the same release cycle.  I think that that was still the plan when I wrote this list, so I'm not sure why I wrote "soak as tech preview for at least 1 OCP release".  Maybe the plan changed as I was drafting this, resulting in this internal inconsistency in the EP.)  

I think that the list is correct, but I do need to update the subsequent paragraph to reflect that step 9 will happen in 4.19.  

I also need to change "Remove the featuregate" to "Enable the featuregate by default".  Since writing this EP, I learned that a featuregate is supposed to remain for several releases after the feature graduates to GA.

If DCM cannot configure something dynamically, it falls back to the old
fork-and-reload procedure.  In particular, the following conditions require
falling back to fork and reload:

- More routes are created than the number of pre-allocated backends.
- More endpoints are created for a route than the number of pre-allocated server slots for that specific route's backend.
- A route is created that does not match the TLS termination type and annotations of any blueprint route.

In OpenShift 3, configuring blueprint routes was left up to the cluster-admin to
do.  As such, blueprint routes constitute a user-facing API.  Additionally, the
cluster-admin could configure the number of server slots to pre-allocate for
each backend.

Note that pre-allocated server slots and backends take up memory.  In a cluster
with many routes, pre-allocating multiple server slots for each backend can take
a considerably large amount of memory.  See
https://gist.github.com/frobware/2b527ce3f040797909eff482a4776e0b for an
analysis of the potential memory impact for different choices of balancing
algorithm, number of threads, number of backends, and number of pre-allocated

> server slots per backend.

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to see a brief summary that shows how fast memory grows for a typical use case.

Author: Do you mean pulling in Andy's table, or do you mean gathering more data so we can plot some curves?

Reviewer 2: Neither - I meant summarizing the data in the table.  You could keep the reference to the data set.

To avoid operational overhead, avoid adding new APIs, and minimize overhead of
enabling DCM, we will initially omit blueprint routes and only pre-allocate 1
server slot per backend.  This makes DCM an implementation detail; ideally it is
completely invisible to the cluster-admin, except that the router will fork
fewer processes and have more accurate metrics and balancing.  Later, we can
enhance DCM by using newer capabilities in HAProxy 2.y to add arbitrarily many
servers dynamically, add backends dynamically, and update certificates
dynamically.

> 

Reviewer 2: Isn't there anything DCM-related that we could add via the haproxy config template that might require an openshift/API change?  Getting an API framework in place might be useful.   

Are all the Unix socket commands listed in https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/management.html#9.3 considered to be dynamic config options?  So, not only can we add/del servers, but we could also add/del acls, maps, etc, and disable frontends, servers , healthchecks, and set maxconns/rate-limit, etc.

Author: > Isn't there anything DCM-related that we could add via the haproxy config template that might require an openshift/API change? Getting an API framework in place might be useful.

Ideally not.  We want DCM to be as transparent and dynamic as possible, requiring no ahead-of-time configuration.  

> Are all the Unix socket commands listed in https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/management.html#9.3 considered to be dynamic config options? So, not only can we add/del servers, but we could also add/del acls, maps, etc, and disable frontends, servers , healthchecks, and set maxconns/rate-limit, etc.

Right, any configuration that the router performs using the Unix domain socket is dynamic configuration.  We might indeed be able to use additional capabilities to avoid reloads in more cases.  

Of course, we do need to do some cost-benefit analysis.  It may be worth the engineering effort to implement dynamic configuration of, say certificates but not worth the effort to implement dynamic configuration of rate limiting, depending on how much effort is required and how often people actually update that particular kind of configuration.

### Risks and Mitigations

Dynamic Config Manager has some known defects:

> - [OCPBUGS-7466 No prometheus haproxy metrics present for route created by dynamicConfigManager](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-7466)

Reviewer: Is this still a risk considering the fact that we won't enable blueprint routes?

Author: Ah, right, OCPBUGS-7466 pertains to blueprint routes.  We can note this as irrelevant for our supported configuration.

> - [OCPBUGSM-20868 Sticky cookies take long to start working if config manager is enabled](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGSM-20868)

Reviewer: Interesting, essentially this is what I discovered too ([fix PR](https://github.com/openshift/router/pull/636)).

per backend and without blueprint routes.  Eventually, DCM will be enhanced to
use newer HAProxy capabilities to perform more configuration without
pre-allocating servers or backends, thus preventing reloads in more cases
without adding any additional up-front memory overhead.

#### Redundancy with respect to Istio/Envoy

DCM is similar in concept to [Envoy
xDS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/operations/dynamic_configuration).
Both enable a control plane (openshift-router or Istio) to configure a data
plane (HAProxy or Envoy, respectively) without restarting processes.  Investing
in DCM could be considered a redundant effort when Istio/Envoy already exists
and avoids the problem.  However, many customers depend on OpenShift router for
its performance and reliability and will continue using it indefinitely.  For
these customers, DCM could improve OpenShift router's performance and
reliability without forcing a change in APIs (from Route API to Gateway API) or
proxies (from HAProxy to Envoy).

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

#### Can we use HAProxy's control socket to add backends and certificates dynamically?

> Answer: **?**.

Reviewer: Backends - no. Certificates - seems like [yes](https://www.haproxy.com/documentation/haproxy-runtime-api/reference/new-ssl-cert/).

Author: Yeah, it does seem that dynamic backends are are long discussed but never implemented possibility.  Sadface.

We need to determine what kind of configuration changes cannot be implemented in
DCM and either document these limitations or work with HAProxy upstream to
enhance HAProxy's management capabilities and remove these limitations.

#### Can we configure Dynamic Config Manager with 0 pre-allocated servers?

Answer: **Probably no, but need verification**.

One option could be to enable DCM initially with 0 pre-allocated server slots
per backend.  If this worked, it would be useful to avoid reloads for scale-in,
or for scale-out following scale-in.  However, we found that DCM still requires
a reload for scale-in of a server that doesn't use a pre-allocated server slot.

> (TODO: This needs to be double-checked.)

Reviewer: I did see stopped not pre-allocated servers. So, scale ins should still be dynamic.

Reviewer: Btw even the route deletion doesn't lead to a reload if DCM is enabled. All of the servers of the deleted backend will be disabled but the backend will stay in `show backend` output.

Reviewer 3: This raises the question of whether we need to log additional operational debug information somewhere. With DCM enabled, the haproxy.config becomes stale, so relying solely on its contents during debugging could lead to misleading conclusions.

Reviewer: Right. I had [a user story for this](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1823) but didn't have enough time to implement something for this iteration.

Author: > I tried to scale a deployment from 4 replicas (`3 pre-allocated slots UP + 1 dynamic slot UP`) to 1. Here is the output of `show servers state`:

I'm confused.  I've been saying "pre-allocated" to describe the slots that we pre-allocate in `haproxy.config` for DCM to use to add new server endpoints to a backend.  What do you mean when you say "3 pre-allocated slots"?  Are these 3 pre-allocated slots for DCM, or are these 3 `server` lines for endpoints that are defined in `haproxy.config`?  

Are you saying that I can create a route with 3 endpoints (which get written to `haproxy.config`), and then scale in to 1 endpoint, and no reload is required?  

If I have a route with 1 pod endpoint (written to `haproxy.config`), delete the pod, then recreate the pod, is a reload required?  

> Btw even the route deletion doesn't lead to a reload if DCM is enabled. All of the servers of the deleted backend will be disabled but the backend will stay in `show backend` output.

This is excellent news!  

Can you reproduce these results with non-TLS, TLS passthrough, edge-terminated, and reencrypt routes?  Since there are some nuances (`server` versus `server-template`), I'm wary of subtle differences in behavior for different route types.

Reviewer: > I'm confused. I've been saying "pre-allocated" to describe the slots that we pre-allocate in haproxy.config for DCM to use to add new server endpoints to a backend. What do you mean when you say "3 pre-allocated slots"? Are these 3 pre-allocated slots for DCM, or are these 3 server lines for endpoints that are defined in haproxy.config?

Sorry, my bad. I should have called them "static" slots. The pre-allocated are dynamic slots.

> Are you saying that I can create a route with 3 endpoints (which get written to haproxy.config), and then scale in to 1 endpoint, and no reload is required?

Right, if DCM is enabled.

> If I have a route with 1 pod endpoint (written to haproxy.config), delete the pod, then recreate the pod, is a reload required?

No. The deletion of the pod will set the corresponding server to `maintenance` mode. The recreation of a pod will use the dynamic (pre-allocated) server slot to set the new IP.

#### Do we need an override to turn off Dynamic Config Manager?

Answer: **Probably yes**.

Ingress is a critical cluster function, and it is an extremely
performance-sensitive one for some customers.  In case we ship DCM enabled and a
customer finds some critical issue, we need an unsupported config override that
support staff can use to turn off DCM temporarily until we fix the issue.

### Test Plan

Dynamic Config Manager will be enabled initially using a TechPreviewNoUpgrade
featuregate to provide CI signal.  We will additionally revisit existing E2E
tests, enable any DCM-related E2E tests that are currently not enabled, and
verify that all enabled router-related E2E tests pass with DCM.  As known
defects are fixed and any unknown ones are discovered, we will add additional
tests.  Finally, we will work with partners to verify DCM for their use-cases.

Expanding test coverage is important both for verifying that DCM is ready for GA
as well as for enabling us to improve DCM in future releases with confidence
that we are not introducing regressions.

### Graduation Criteria

We will introduce the feature as TechPreviewNoUpgrade in OpenShift 4.18, with

> the goal of graduating it to GA in the same release.  Further improvements to

Reviewer 2: Is the "goal of graduating it to GA in the same release" still applicable given our 2025 priorities?

Author: Depends on how things go with the Tech Preview, and whether we discover any new major issues.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- All known regressions are fixed.
- Payload tests pass with DCM enabled.
- At least 2 partners or customers provide test results on DCM's function.
- Memory overhead is within acceptable limits.
- Limitations (such as which changes still require reload) are documented.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

The feature requires no specific considerations for upgrade or downgrade;
cluster-ingress-operator will handle upgrading the router image and configuring
Dynamic Config Manager, using the standard process for a rolling update of the
router deployment.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

N/A.  The operation of this feature should be transparent to the end user.

#### Failure Modes

If Dynamic Config Manager cannot handle a configuration change, it falls back to
the old fork-and-reload procedure.  Thus in the worst case, OpenShift router
should behave no better or worse with DCM than without DCM.

If an unforeseen defect arises, DCM can be inhibited using an unsupported config
override:

```shell

> oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{"spec":{"unsupportedConfigOverrides":{"dynamicConfigManager":"false"}}}'

Reviewer 3: For upgrades, I assume you need to remove the unsupported override and re-enable it once the upgrade is complete. However, this raises the question: if DCM is re-enabled, does that imply the cluster may be broken from an ingress perspective until the update is complete and DCM can be disabled again?  Is that going to be an acceptable stance for production clusters?

Author: > For upgrades, I assume you need to remove the unsupported override and re-enable it once the upgrade is complete. 

We *should*, but currently do not, block upgrades when using `unsupportedConfigOverrides` (reported as https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-41366).  

> However, this raises the question: if DCM is re-enabled, does that imply the cluster may be broken from an ingress perspective until the update is complete and DCM can be disabled again? Is that going to be an acceptable stance for production clusters?

I guess you're saying that `unsupportedConfigOverrides` isn't a good escape hatch after all, right?  You can probably force an upgrade using `oc adm --force`, but I understand that `--force` is a last resort.  

I suppose we could tell people to turn off the featuregate.  Is that a reasonable escape hatch?

Reviewer 3: > I suppose we could tell people to turn off the featuregate. Is that a reasonable escape hatch?

Yes, I would say so.

```

#### Support Procedures

Metrics and logs are the same as without Dynamic Config Manager:

- The `reload_seconds`, `reload_failure`, and `write_config_seconds` metrics remain.
- The router pod logs will report reloads as well as any errors from DCM.
- The `dynamicConfigManager` unsupported config override remains available.

## Implementation History

- OpenShift Enterprise 3.11 added DCM and the `ROUTER_HAPROXY_CONFIG_MANAGER` option ([release notes](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/release_notes/ocp_3_11_release_notes.html#ocp-311-haproxy-enhancements), [documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/install_config/router/default_haproxy_router.html#using-the-dynamic-configuration-manager)).
- OpenShift Container Platform 4.9 added the `dynamicConfigManager` config override, default off ([openshift/cluster-ingress-operator@6a8516a](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/628/commits/6a8516ab247b00b87a5d7b32e20d4cffcefe1c0f)).

> - OpenShift Container Platform 4.18 enables DCM by default.

Reviewer 2: Not exactly, if we use a feature gate.
